FEA add TunedThresholdClassifier meta-estimator to post-tune the cut-off threshold (#26120)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/classification_threshold.rst

decision threshold. The vanilla classifier predicts the class of interest for a
conditional probability greater than 0.5 while the tuned classifier predicts the class
of interest for a very low probability (around 0.02). This decision threshold optimizes
a utility metric defined by the business (in this case an insurance company).

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/model_selection/images/sphx_glr_plot_cost_sensitive_learning_002.png
   :target: ../auto_examples/model_selection/plot_cost_sensitive_learning.html
   :align: center

Options to tune the decision threshold
--------------------------------------

The decision threshold can be tuned through different strategies controlled by the
parameter `objective_metric`.

One way to tune the threshold is by maximizing a pre-defined scikit-learn metric. These
metrics can be found by calling the function :func:`~sklearn.metrics.get_scorer_names`.
By default, the balanced accuracy is the metric used but be aware that one should choose
a meaningful metric for their use case.

.. note::

    It is important to notice that these metrics come with default parameters, notably

>     the label of the class of interested (i.e. `pos_label`). Thus, if this label is not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    the label of the class of interest (i.e. `pos_label`). Thus, if this label is not
```

.. currentmodule:: sklearn.model_selection

.. _tunedthresholdclassifier:

======================================================
Tuning cut-off decision threshold for class prediction
======================================================

> 

Reviewer 2: I would start with a sentence like:

Classification is best divided into two parts:
1. the statistical problem of learning a model to predict, ideally, class probabilities
2. the decision problem to take concrete action based on those probability predictions.

Maybe put the tumor detecting example already here. Or a simpler example with taking an umbrella based on the weather prediction.

Author: I rephrase a bit the first paragraph to take this suggestion into account.

measure of how strongly the sample is predicted to belong to the positive class (e.g.,
the distance to the decision boundary). In binary classification, a decision rule is
then defined by thresholding the scores, leading to a single class label for each
sample. Those labels are obtained with :term:`predict`.

For binary classification in scikit-learn, class labels are obtained by associating the
positive class with posterior probability estimates greater than 0.5 (obtained with
:term:`predict_proba`) or decision scores greater than 0 (obtained with
:term:`decision_function`).

Here, we show an example that illustrates the relation between posterior
probability estimates and class labels::

    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.tree import DecisionTreeClassifier
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=0)
    >>> classifier = DecisionTreeClassifier(max_depth=2, random_state=0).fit(X, y)
    >>> classifier.predict_proba(X[:4])
    array([[0.94     , 0.06     ],
           [0.94     , 0.06     ],
           [0.0416..., 0.9583...],
           [0.0416..., 0.9583...]])
    >>> classifier.predict(X[:4])
    array([0, 0, 1, 1])

> While these approaches are reasonable as default behaviors, they are not ideal for
> all cases. Let's illustrate with an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While these hard-coded rules might at first seem reasonable as default behavior, they are most certainly
not ideal for most use cases. Let's illustrate with an example.
```
I would even put an alarm box around it, or make it at least bold.

> Let's consider a scenario where a predictive model is being deployed to assist medical
> doctors in detecting tumors. In this setting, doctors will be most likely interested in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's consider a scenario where a predictive model is being deployed to assist physicians
in detecting tumors. In this setting, physicians will be most likely interested in
```

> correctly identifying all patients with cancer so that they can provide them with the
> right treatment. In other words, doctors prioritize achieving a high recall rate,
> meaning they want to identify all cases of cancer without missing any patients who have
> it. This emphasis on recall comes, of course, with the trade-off of potentially more

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
identifying all patients with cancer and not missing anyone with cancer so that they can provide them with the
right treatment. In other words, physicians prioritize achieving a high recall rate. This emphasis on recall comes, of course, with the trade-off of potentially more
```

> false-positive predictions, reducing the precision of the model, but that is a risk
> doctors are willing to take. Consequently, when it comes to deciding whether to classify

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
false-positive predictions, reducing the precision of the model. That is a risk
physicians are willing to take because the cost of a missed cancer is much higher than the cost of further diagnostic tests. Consequently, when it comes to deciding whether to classify
```

a patient as having cancer or not, it may be more beneficial to classify them as

> positive for cancer when the posterior probability estimate is lower than 0.5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
positive for cancer when the posterior probability estimate is much lower than 0.5.
```

> Post-tuning the decision threshold

Reviewer 3: As I mentioned in the other example, I would introduce the roc curve earlier in the explanation.

internal cross-validation. The optimum threshold is chosen to maximize a given metric
with or without constraints.

The following image illustrates the tuning of the cut-off point for a gradient boosting
classifier. While the vanilla and tuned classifiers provide the same Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) and Precision-Recall curves, and thus the same
:term:`predict_proba` outputs, the class label predictions differ because of the tuned
decision threshold. The vanilla classifier predicts the class of interest for a
posterior probability greater than 0.5 while the tuned classifier predicts the class of
interest for a very low probability (around 0.02). This cut-off point optimizes a
utility metric defined by the business (in this case an insurance company).

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/model_selection/images/sphx_glr_plot_cost_sensitive_learning_002.png
   :target: ../auto_examples/model_selection/plot_cost_sensitive_learning.html
   :align: center

Options to tune the cut-off point
---------------------------------

The cut-off point can be tuned through different strategies controlled by the parameter
`objective_metric`.

> One way to tune the threshold is by maximizing a pre-defined scikit-learn metric. These

Reviewer 3: I would maybe mention that a common tuning is picking the top right point on the ROC curve which is the same as picking f2 score (I think?) here. Or maybe mention that that has a nice geometric explanation but doesn't really consider the application.

  is the closest to a given value.
- `"max_recall_at_precision_constraint"`: maximizes the recall such that the precision
  is the closest to a given value.

For these options, the `constraint_value` parameter needs to be defined. In addition,
you can use the `pos_label` parameter to indicate the label of the class of interest.

Important notes regarding the internal cross-validation
-------------------------------------------------------

By default :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` uses a 5-fold
stratified cross-validation to tune the cut-off point. The parameter `cv` allows to
control the cross-validation strategy. It is possible to bypass cross-validation by
setting `cv="prefit"` and providing a fitted classifier. In this case, the cut-off point
is tuned on the data provided to the `fit` method.

However, you should be extremely careful when using this option. You should never use
the same data for training the classifier and tuning the cut-off point due to the risk
of overfitting. Refer to the following example section for more details (cf.
:ref:`tunedthresholdclassifier_no_cv`). If you have limited resources, consider using a

> float number to limit to an internal single train-test split.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
float number for `cv` to limit to an internal single train-test split.
```

.. currentmodule:: sklearn.model_selection

.. _tunedthresholdclassifier:

========================================================
Tuning cut-off decision threshold for classes prediction
========================================================

Classifiers are predictive models: they use statistical learning to predict outcomes.
The outcomes of a classifier are scores for each sample in relation to each class and
categorical prediction (class label). Scores are obtained from :term:`predict_proba` or
:term:`decision_function`. The former returns posterior probability estimates for each
class, while the latter returns a decision score for each class. The decision score is a
measure of how strongly the sample is predicted to belong to the positive class (e.g.,

> the distance to the decision boundary). A decision rule is then defined by thresholding

Author: Indeed, I make it clearer that here we speak about binary classification for the decision.

Let's consider a scenario where a predictive model is being deployed to assist medical
doctors in detecting tumors. In this setting, doctors will be most likely interested in
correctly identifying all patients with cancer so that they can provide them with the
right treatment. In other words, doctors prioritize achieving a high recall rate,
meaning they want to identify all cases of cancer without missing any patients who have
it. This emphasis on recall comes, of course, with the trade-off of potentially more
false-positive predictions, reducing the precision of the model, but that is a risk
doctors are willing to take. Consequently, when it comes to deciding whether to classify
a patient as having cancer or not, it may be more beneficial to classify them as
positive for cancer when the posterior probability estimate is lower than 0.5.

Post-tuning the decision threshold
==================================

One solution to address the problem stated in the introduction is to tune the decision
threshold of the classifier once the model has been trained. The
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` tunes this threshold using an

> internal cross-validation. The optimum threshold is chosen to maximize a given metric

Author: Today, I would indeed consider it as a design and methodological flaw. I don't know what level of justification do you think we should add-on here:

```
... tunes this threshold using an internal cross-validation since the scikit-learn
:term:`predict` API does not offer this flexibility.
```

> internal cross-validation. The optimum threshold is chosen to maximize a given metric

Reviewer 2: > we still don't have an API for path-like algorithms and efficient CV

@amueller What do you mean by that?

> is this tool just a workaround for a design flaw wherein a parameter to BaseClassifier is not exposed

and
> Today, I would indeed consider it as a design and methodological flaw.

@glemaitre @jnothman Shouldn't we fix this design flaw? Do you have suggestions?

> internal cross-validation. The optimum threshold is chosen to maximize a given metric

Author: > Shouldn't we fix this design flaw? Do you have suggestions?

This is something that I would introduce in 2.0 because we will surely break some API. In this case, we could the freedom to think about a good API.

> internal cross-validation. The optimum threshold is chosen to maximize a given metric

Reviewer 2: I guess what I am missing is a roadmap or a plan/vision.

.. currentmodule:: sklearn.model_selection

.. _tunedthresholdclassifier:

========================================================
Tuning cut-off decision threshold for classes prediction
========================================================

Classifiers are predictive models: they use statistical learning to predict outcomes.
The outcomes of a classifier are scores for each sample in relation to each class and
categorical prediction (class label). Scores are obtained from :term:`predict_proba` or
:term:`decision_function`. The former returns posterior probability estimates for each

> class while the latter returns a decision score for each class. The decision score is a

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
class, while the latter returns a decision score for each class. The decision score is a
```

> measure of how strongly the sample is predicted to belong to the positive class (e.g.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
measure of how strongly the sample is predicted to belong to the positive class (e.g.,
```

> the distance to the decisin boundary). A decision rule is then defined by thresholding

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the distance to the decision boundary). A decision rule is then defined by thresholding
```

> the scores and obtained the class label for each sample. Those labels are obtained with

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the scores and obtaining the class label for each sample. Those labels are obtained with
```

:term:`predict`.

For binary classification in scikit-learn, class labels are obtained by associating the
positive class with posterior probability estimates greater than 0.5 (obtained with
:term:`predict_proba`) or decision scores greater than 0 (obtained with
:term:`decision_function`).

Here, we show an example that illustrates the relation between posterior
probability estimates and class labels::

    >>> from sklearn.datasets import make_classification
    >>> from sklearn.tree import DecisionTreeClassifier
    >>> X, y = make_classification(random_state=0)
    >>> classifier = DecisionTreeClassifier(max_depth=2, random_state=0).fit(X, y)
    >>> classifier.predict_proba(X[:4])
    array([[0.94   , 0.06   ],
           [0.94   , 0.06   ],
           [0.04..., 0.95...],
           [0.04..., 0.95...]])
    >>> classifier.predict(X[:4])
    array([0, 0, 1, 1])

> While these approaches are reasonable as default behaviors, they are not be ideal for

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
While these approaches are reasonable as default behaviors, they are not ideal for
```

all cases. The context and nature of the use case defines the expected behavior of the

> classifier and thus the strategy to convert soft predictions into hard predictions. We

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
classifier and thus, the strategy to convert soft predictions into hard predictions. We
```

illustrate this point with an example.

Let's imagine the deployment of a predictive model helping medical doctors to detect
tumour. In a setting where this model was a tool to discard obvious cases and false
positives don't lead to potentially harmful treatments, doctors might be interested in
having a high recall (all cancer cases should be tagged as such) to not miss any patient
with a cancer. However, that is at the cost of having more false positive predictions
(i.e. lower precision). Thus, in terms of decision threshold, it may be better to
classify a patient as having a cancer for a posterior probability estimate lower than
0.5.

> 

Reviewer 4: This paragraph is not clear. What do you mean by "obvious cases"? clearly with tumor? or clearly healthy? Or both? as in clearly one class or the other? Also, what do you mean "discard"? not treat?

I try rewording:

Let's consider a scenario where a predictive model is being deployed to assist medical doctors in detecting tumors. In this setting, doctors will be most likely interested in correctly identifying all patients with cancer so that they can provide them with the right treatment. In other words, doctors prioritize achieving a high recall rate, meaning they want to identify all cases of cancer without missing any patients who have it. This emphasis on recall comes, of course, with the trade-off of potentially more false-positive predictions, reducing the precision of the model, but that is a risk doctors are willing to take. Consequently, when it comes to deciding whether to classify a patient as having cancer or not, it may be more beneficial to classify them as positive for cancer when the posterior probability estimate is lower than 0.5.

Author: I like the proposal. Thanks

> Post-tuning of the decision threshold

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Post-tuning the decision threshold
```

=====================================

One solution to address the problem stated in the introduction is to tune the decision
threshold of the classifier once the model has been trained. The
:class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` tunes this threshold using an
internal cross-validation. The optimum threshold is chosen to maximize a given metric
with or without constraints.

The following image illustrates the tuning of the cut-off point for a gradient boosting
classifier. While the vanilla and tuned classifiers provide the same Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) and Precision-Recall curves, and thus the same
:term:`predict_proba` outputs, the class label predictions differ because of the tuned
decision threshold. The vanilla classifier predicts the class of interest for a
posterior probability greater than 0.5 while the tuned classifier predicts the class of
interest for a very low probability (around 0.02). This cut-off point optimizes a

> utility metric defined by the business case (in this case an insurance company).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
utility metric defined by the business (in this case an insurance company).
```

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/model_selection/images/sphx_glr_plot_tuned_threshold_classifier_002.png
   :target: ../auto_examples/model_selection/plot_tuned_threshold_classifier.html
   :align: center

> Available options to tune the cut-off point

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Options to tune the cut-off point
```

-------------------------------------------

> The cut-off point can be tuned with different strategies controlled by the parameter

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The cut-off point can be tuned through different strategies controlled by the parameter
```

`objective_metric`.

> A straightforward use case is to maximize a pre-defined scikit-learn metric. These

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
One way to tune the threshold is by maximizing a pre-defined scikit-learn metric. These
```

metrics can be found by calling the function :func:`~sklearn.metrics.get_scorer_names`.

> We provide an example where we maximize the balanced accuracy.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
In this example, we maximize the balanced accuracy.
```

Reviewer 4: Does this sentence refer to the below example? because the example optimizes the f1 score.

.. note::

    It is important to notice that these metrics come with default parameters, notably
    the label of the class of interested (i.e. `pos_label`). Thus, if this label is not
    the right one for your application, you need to define a scorer and pass the right
    `pos_label` (and additional parameters) using the

>     :func:`~sklearn.metrics.make_scorer`. You should refer to :ref:`scoring` to get all

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    :func:`~sklearn.metrics.make_scorer`. Refer to :ref:`scoring` to get 
```

    information to define your own scoring function. For instance, we show how to pass
    the information to the scorer that the label of interest is `0` when maximizing the
    :func:`~sklearn.metrics.f1_score`:

        >>> from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
        >>> from sklearn.model_selection import (
        ...     TunedThresholdClassifier, train_test_split
        ... )
        >>> from sklearn.metrics import make_scorer, f1_score
        >>> X, y = make_classification(
        ...    n_samples=1_000, weights=[0.1, 0.9], random_state=0)
        >>> X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, random_state=0)
        >>> pos_label = 0
        >>> scorer = make_scorer(f1_score, pos_label=pos_label)
        >>> base_model = LogisticRegression()
        >>> model = TunedThresholdClassifier(base_model, objective_metric=scorer).fit(
        ...     X_train, y_train)
        >>> scorer(model, X_test, y_test)
        0.82...
        >>> # compare it with the internal score found by cross-validation
        >>> model.objective_score_
        0.86...

> A second strategy aims at maximizing a metric while imposing constraints on another

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A second strategy aims to maximize one metric while imposing constraints on another
```

> metric. Four pre-defined options exist, 2 that uses the Receiver Operating

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
metric. There are four pre-defined options, 2 use the Receiver Operating
```

> Characteristic (ROC) statistics and 2 that uses the Precision-Recall statistics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Characteristic (ROC) statistics and 2 use the Precision-Recall statistics.
```

- `"max_tpr_at_tnr_constraint"`: maximizes the True Positive Rate (TPR) such that the
  True Negative Rate (TNR) is the closest to a given value.

> - `"max_tnr_at_tpr_constraint"`: maximizes the TNR such that the TPR is the closest to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- `"max_tnr_at_tpr_constraint"`: maximizes the True Negative Rate (TNR) such that the TPR is the closest to
```

  a given value.
- `"max_precision_at_recall_constraint"`: maximizes the precision such that the recall
  is the closest to a given value.
- `"max_recall_at_precision_constraint"`: maximizes the recall such that the precision
  is the closest to a given value.

For these options, the `constraint_value` parameter needs to be defined. In addition,
you can use the `pos_label` parameter to indicate the label of the class of interest.

> The final strategy maximizes a custom utility function. This problem is also known as

Reviewer 4: Is this MetaCost? If that is the case, instead of saying "utility function" which is unclear what it is, we may say "conditional risk". and then quote the reference: https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/312129.312220

Author: This is not really MetaCost procedure here. We are to revisit the statistical term indeed.

cost-sensitive learning. The utility function is defined by providing a dictionary
containing the cost-gain associated with the entries of the confusion matrix. The keys
are defined as `{"tn", "fp", "fn", "tp"}`. The class of interest is defined using the
`pos_label` parameter. Refer to :ref:`cost_sensitive_learning_example` for an example
depicting the use of such a utility function.

Important notes regarding the internal cross-validation
-------------------------------------------------------

By default :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` uses a
5-fold stratified cross-validation to tune the cut-off point. The parameter

> `cv` allows to control the cross-validation strategy. It is possible to go

Reviewer 4: instead of "go around" I'd say "avoid the cross validation step"

> around cross-validation by passing `cv="prefit"` and provide an already fitted

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
around cross-validation by passing `cv="prefit"` and providing an already fitted
```

classifier. In this case, the cut-off point is tuned on the data provided to
the `fit` method.

However, you should be extremely careful when using this option. You should never use
the same data for training the classifier and tuning the cut-off point at the risk of

> overfitting. Refer to :ref:`tunedthresholdclassifier_no_cv` that shows such overfitting. If

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
overfitting. Refer to :ref:`tunedthresholdclassifier_no_cv` for an example. If
```

you are in a situation where you have limited resources, you should consider using
a float number that will use a single split internally.

> 

Reviewer 4: I am not sure I understand these 2 sentences, but I'd reword like this:

""
If you have limited resources, use a float number to limit to a single split internally
""

But what does that mean? limit to a single split?

Author: a single traint-test split.

The option `cv="prefit"` should only be used when the provided classifier was already

> trained on some data and you want to tune (or re-tune) on a new validation set.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
trained, and you just want to find the best cut-off using a new validation set.
```

> Manually setting the decision thresholding

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Manually setting the probability cut-off
```

Author: It is not necessarily probability.

-------------------------------------------

The previous sections discussed strategies to find an optimal decision threshold. It is
also possible to manually set the decision threshold in
:class`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` by setting the parameter

> `strategy` to `"constant"` and provide the desired threshold using the parameter

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
`strategy` to `"constant"` and providing the desired threshold using the parameter
```

`constant_threshold`.

Examples
--------

- See
  :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_model_selection_plot_tuned_threshold_classifier.py`

>   example for an example of tuning the decision threshold of a classifier.

Reviewer 4: example for an example doesn't read very well. I guess it follows up from the title in the indicated file?

    information to define your own scoring function. For instance, we show how to pass
    the information to the scorer that the label of interest is `0` when maximizing the
    :func:`~sklearn.metrics.f1_score`::

        >>> from sklearn.linear_model import LogisticRegression
        >>> from sklearn.model_selection import TunedThresholdClassifierCV
        >>> from sklearn.metrics import make_scorer, f1_score
        >>> X, y = make_classification(
        ...   n_samples=1_000, weights=[0.1, 0.9], random_state=0)
        >>> pos_label = 0
        >>> scorer = make_scorer(f1_score, pos_label=pos_label)
        >>> base_model = LogisticRegression()
        >>> model = TunedThresholdClassifierCV(base_model, objective_metric=scorer)
        >>> scorer(model.fit(X, y), X, y)
        0.88...
        >>> # compare it with the internal score found by cross-validation
        >>> model.best_score_
        0.86...

A second strategy aims to maximize one metric while imposing constraints on another
metric. There are four pre-defined options, two use the Receiver Operating
Characteristic (ROC) statistics and two use the Precision-Recall statistics.

> - `"max_tpr_at_tnr_constraint"`: maximizes the True Positive Rate (TPR) such that the

Author: yep to the same `objective_metric`. I can make it explicit.

are most certainly not ideal for most use cases. Let's illustrate with an example.

Let's consider a scenario where a predictive model is being deployed to assist
physicians in detecting tumors. In this setting, physicians will be most likely
interested in identifying all patients with cancer and not missing anyone with cancer so
that they can provide them with the right treatment. In other words, physicians
prioritize achieving a high recall rate. This emphasis on recall comes, of course, with
the trade-off of potentially more false-positive predictions, reducing the precision of
the model. That is a risk physicians are willing to take because the cost of a missed
cancer is much higher than the cost of further diagnostic tests. Consequently, when it
comes to deciding whether to classify a patient as having cancer or not, it may be more
beneficial to classify them as positive for cancer when the posterior probability
estimate is much lower than 0.5.

Post-tuning the decision threshold
==================================

One solution to address the problem stated in the introduction is to tune the decision
threshold of the classifier once the model has been trained. The

> :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` tunes this threshold using an

Author: I think I'm fine with the current statement. Potentially, we can be more precise by stating something like:

```
One solution to address the problem stated in the introduction is to tune the decision
threshold of the classifier. :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier`
leverages cross-validation where a model is fitted on each training split while an
optimum threshold is found on each validation split. The optimum threshold is chosen
to maximize a given metric with or without constraints. Finally, the model can be
refitted on the full dataset and the decision threshold is set to the average of
the mean decision thresholds found during cross-validation.
```

Is it better reflecting what you had in mind or I missed the point?

> :class:`~sklearn.model_selection.TunedThresholdClassifier` tunes this threshold using an

Reviewer: no no you're right, I also think it's fine as is
